focus on taking the musculature to the
most intense experience of fatigue and
then you want to repeat
[Music]
that. Today we're going to talk about
why short workouts can be superior to
longer workouts. My name is Dr. John
Jish. I have a PhD in biomedical
engineering. I'm the developer of a
number of medical devices and fitness
products and I'm going to talk about a
science-based approach to training that
may be a little bit different different
areas of science. Uh I'm not a sports
scientist. I'm a biomedical engineer. So
I have a significantly different
perspective than a lot of the people
that you see on YouTube. When it comes
to how much time you spend working out,
uh there's obviously a lot of variation.
There's a lot of different
recommendations that you'll see. There's
very few things we can say about fitness
and health and the human body that are
like unequivocal, right? When somebody
says, "Is this exercise good? Is this
other thing good?" The answer is almost
always, "Well, it depends." There's a
few things that you don't have the well,
it depends sort of situation. Workout
durations are one of those things.
Ultimately, the greatest stimulus that
happens to the body is the most intense
stimulus. So, think about if you're
building a callus on your hand. If you
have a hard abrasion on your hand for a
very brief period of time, you build a
callus. If you have a hard abrasion on
your hand for a long period of time,
you'll tear your your your hands up.
You'll be bleeding. Uh if you have a low
intensity, so low pressure on your hand
for an extended period of time, you get
a blister. And that parallels very
perfectly with musculature. If you
overexpose the musculature to stimuli,
you just do too many sets or too many
exercises, go to failure too many times,
uh or you really beat up on the
stretched range of motion, which damages
joints. And that's a common problem as
of recently because there have been a
lot of people promoting the stretch
range of motion and it's been slightly
overexaggerated but it's still really
important. Focus on taking the
musculature to the most intense
experience of fatigue and then you want
to repeat that as often as possible. So
there are many different approaches to
doing this. So variable resistance is
one of the approaches that I talk about
because I developed a product that
focuses on variable resistance and uh
that in research delivers the absolute
greatest results for strength and
muscular growth. However, on top of
that, I also do rest pause style sets.
What's rest pause? And by the way, I
didn't name that. I realize it's a dumb
name. It's like are you resting twice?
Like what what's going on? No, what's
happening is you're taking a break from
a set so that you can recover some of
your cardiovascular ability and some of
the muscle's ability to continue to
contract under a high load. So, let's
say I'll do a set and 20 repetitions
strict form. Now, because I do variable
resistance, my reps get shorter as I
proceed. I go to complete failure. Let's
say I go to failure five times in that
one experience. Then I might take five
to 10 breaths depending on what it takes
for my heart rate to start going down
and my breath to come closer to normal.
Not to normal, but closer. And then I
continue. And let's say I I certainly
can't do 20 reps, but I might do five.
And then I can repeat that
process so that I can go to fatigue
multiple times in a much shorter period
of time. So, it's like a super set with
little mini sets after your first main
set. That is another way to massively
increase the stimuli, get a more
powerful experience to the muscle, and
you're much more likely to elicit muscle
growth. One of the things that I'm known
for saying, I I I wrote a best-selling
book, a Wall Street Journal bestselling
book, weightlifting is a waste of time.
Now, a lot of people were like, "How
could you say that?" Well, notice I
didn't say resistance training is a
waste of time. Resistance can be
variable, and that makes it much more
powerful and usable by the 90% of people
who quit within 90 days, which is the
statistic of how quickly people quit
their fitness program. Of course,
they're not quitting because they got
great results. They're quitting because
they got none. Uh, and this is something
that works for absolutely everyone. You
always want that intensity. Another
thing that I think has been distracting
is some have promoted some studies and
legitimately there have been some
studies that showed that stopping your
set far away from failure, what they
call is reps in reserve. So, let's say
you did 10 reps, but you could have done
15. But it's okay because you're going
to do more sets. So, you just do 10
repetitions and then put the weight down
and rest or whatever. For a
while, these studies seemed popular and
a lot of people had the attitude of it
doesn't really matter how close to
fatigue you are, just as long as you're
moving some significant amount of weight
and doing it for multiple sets. And like
to me, that was just like, wow. Okay, so
you're going to get better results by
halfassing your
workout. In life, that never happens. Is
the guy who didn't run very fast at
practice, is he the one that ends up
winning the gold medal? Never,
absolutely never has that happened. So,
when I read that research, I just kind
of shrug my shoulders and thought, I
don't think that's correct. The good
news is uh those studies came out about
10 years ago and ever since then there
have been a lot more studies that show
the closer to momentary muscular fatigue
you you get to the point where you just
can't anymore. So that's that's where
you stop and you want to create these
situations where the most intense
stimuli. So, always train to fatigue.
And then even strategies to get you
beyond fatigue. If you're lifting
regular weights, use a spotter. Have
them help you through the positive. So,
let's say you're doing however many
repetitions and oh, you can't you can't
get it off your chest. You're doing
you're doing a bench press. You can't
get off your chest. You have one of your
friends help you get it up and then
takes his hands away and you lower it
yourself. And then he can So, this is an
approach to variable resistance. is just
using a spotter. But that is going to
allow you to go to fatigue. And this is
so important, multiple times per set.
You don't want to do more sets, per se.
You want to make each set more intense
so that you get more stimulus with with
each set because with each set you do,
your later sets just get lame because
you're exhausted. you're wasted. You
can't do it. So, I see people sometimes
towards the end of their workout,
they're bench pressing something really
impressive and then the the latter sets,
they're, you know, they got like half
the weight on the bar and they're not
doing very many repetitions and they're
just kind of exhausted and and they have
a term for this. It's called junk
volume. Don't do junk volume. High
intensity. You want to you want to
stimulate the muscle as much as
possible, which does not mean damage.
Stimulate. So exhaustion over and over
and over again in a in the briefest
period of time and then the growth
happens while you're resting. So then
you want to focus on getting the proper
amount of protein which is one gram per
pound of body weight not body weight you
want to
be body weight that you are. Now if
you're really heavy if you if you got a
lot of extra body fat you can adjust to
imagine that your body fat was a 20%.
because a lot of studies that determined
one gram per pound of body weight if you
look at the body fat if if they measured
it but there's dozens of studies here.
So we have a pretty good set of numbers.
If you're right around 20% body fat then
you know you're like the the test
subjects in the study and the multiple
studies that determined one gram per
pound of body weight is uh is really the
right thing. Now of course there also
are some studies that suggest a little
bit more, some that suggest a little bit
less. Usually the ones that suggest a
little bit more are from people who are
trying to gain muscle and lose body fat
at the same time. And that is a subject
that we will cover in another video.
Ultimately with the short
workouts, you just want to focus on
intensity. So everything is a strategy
to get the most intense stimulus into
the muscle to trigger the most growth.
If this video helped you, I want you to
subscribe and follow. I'm going to put
out videos on a regular basis. I think
they're going to help a whole lot of
people, especially if you're one of
those people that doesn't just instantly
grow from lifting regular weights. We've
got the answer for you.